By emphasising the time needed for ideas to come to fruition via the metaphor of thoughts becoming “full ripened grain” in When I have fears (1818), Keats expresses how mortality may cut short one’s full self-development.  The threat of life’s transience is crystallised as Keats shifts from the expectant qualifier ‘before’ in “Before my pen has gleaned… Before high piled books…” to the pessimistic certainty of ‘never’ in “I may never live… never look… Never have relish”, underscoring mortality as a force which unrelentingly closes in on future possibilities. Keats expands these fears in ‘Ode to a Nightingale’ (1819), as the personification of “palsy [shaking] a few, sad, last gray hairs,” conveys the physical deterioration of time’s passing. However, in Bright Star (1819), Keats expresses mortality as essential for an authentic existence in his oxymoronic wish to be “Awake for ever in a sweet unrest”, showing how immortality requires sacrificing elements of being human.

Similar to the poem Bright Star by Keats, Campion illustrates how the transience of life is essential to the human experience through Keat’s voice-over of his letter “I almost wish we were butterflies and lived but three summer days”, wherein butterflies symbolise transience to convey Keat’s acceptance of mortality as he desires true love. Campion mirrors Keat’s depiction of the threat of life’s transience through the fabric motif in the metaphor “We have woven a web, you and I [...] We must cut the threads” during Keats and Fanny’s final meeting, where the romantic concept of the world of their imagination is out of reach as they both fear Keats mortality. Campion also utilises the medium of film to portray the collective effects of mortality on others, rather than just on oneself as in Keat’s poetry. The difficulty in accepting another’s death is illustrated through the close up tracking shot of Fanny wandering in the final scene - the cold colours and her dark garment symbolising her grief over her lover’s death.

In Ode to a Grecian Urn (1819), Keats celebrates how beauty can be preserved by art through the personification of the Urn which can “thus express / A flowery tale more sweetly than our rhyme,” as the tale transcends the transience of life. Further, the power of imagination to immerse an individual in an artistic experience is demonstrated through the enjambment “Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard / Are sweeter”, whereby imagined “sweet” melodies preserve the beauty of transient moments. Similarly, in Ode to a Nightingale (1819), the beauty of nature as a catalyst for the power of imagination to enhance our experience of everyday life is shown through the sensory and nature imagery in  “I cannot see what flowers are at my feet, / Nor what soft incense hangs upon the boughs“. Further, the romantic concept of the power of poetry inspired by nature to allow escape from reality is depicted through the metaphor “charioted [...] on the viewless wings of Poesy,” wherein Keats enters a natural, imaginative world to “forget” reality.

Campion establishes the importance of art as the film starts with an extreme close up and then an establishing shot of Fanny and her needle, immediately elevating her sewing as an art form despite her marginalisation in regency England. Similar to Keats work, Campion shows how artistic expression facilitates escape from reality through the close up of Keats kissing Fanny’s pillow slip - her embroidered bare tree has connotations of winter and death as she grieves over Tom’s death by connecting with Keats through her art. Similar to in Ode to a Nightingale, Campion parallels Keat’s depiction of nature as a catalyst for art and imagination through the strong contrast of Fanny in white with a blossom branch outside Keat’s dwelling to the dark lighting inside, where Keats becomes inspired by nature as he writes poetry.

Individuals push back and resist society and social expectations of them to various extents, which creates a diversity to how they respond. William Shakespeare’s 1600 comedic play The Merchant of Venice portrays how prejudiced individuals are restricted and made to conform to societal expectations, resulting in diverse responses. David Fincher’s 1999 thriller/drama Fight Club explores the diverse behaviours people develop in response to the enforcement of conformity and the consumerist nature of society.

The Merchant of Venice illustrates how individuals that are restricted and made to conform to societal expectations respond in diverse ways, dependent on their own personal desires. Reflecting the patriarchal structures of Elizabethan England, the play shows Portia struggling against the challenge of her own limited autonomy through the antanaclasistical lament, “so is the will of a living daughter curbed by the will of a dead father”. The double meaning of her father’s “will'' being a legal document conveys the structural authority which compels her to comply with his dying wishes, in spite of her own. Portia expresses her awareness of the challenge she faces in her metaphorical exclamation that “these naughty times / Put bars between the owners and their rights!” But, rather than resisting this challenge, she embraces her limited autonomy. Hence in the parallel syntax of “One half of me is yours, the other half yours”, she communicates her true desire that Bassanio win her hand in marriage. Although she initially doesn’t resist, when challenged by Antonio’s dire fate she is able to push back against binary gender roles in a way that expresses her diverse range of responses to patriarchal challenges. This is shown through Portia’s imperative that Shylock “Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh”. The patriarchal power structures are reversed as Portia assumes a position of authority and is able to give orders in the courtroom. Therefore, Portia’s changing degree of resistance against patriarchal limitations convey how immediate circumstances can necessitate a diverse array of responses to challenging experiences.

The inconsistencies between Jessica and Shylock’s responses to the challenge of antisemitism reflect how individuals can respond to the same challenge in diverse ways. Jessica responds to the prejudice against Jews by relinquishing her Jewish identity and eloping with a Christian, and the sacrifice she makes to overcome this challenge is expressed in her rhyming couplet “Farewell, and if my fortune be not crost, I have a father, you a daughter, lost”, which aligns the loss of her family with her own fortunes or desires. Shylock in contrast clings steadfast to his own Jewish identity and responds to the challenge of antisemitism by pursuing revenge against his oppressor Antonio. Shylock thus asserts the necessity of revenge through the religious allusion of his speech “And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn / To have the due and forfeit of my bond”, expressing revenge as something owed to him rather than accepting the legitimacy of Christian antisemitism as his daughter does. Thus, the divide between Shylock and Jessica’s responses reveal the diverse approaches to systemic challenges.

The film Fight Club explores the diverse mechanisms and behaviours people develop in response to the encouragement of conformity to a consumerist mindset in society. The protagonist has a split personality, which is split between the characters of the Narrator and of Tyler Durden. The film opens with a suspenseful eye-level zooming-out shot depicting the Narrator bound and restrained by Tyler Durden, establishing Tyler’s developed position of authority in contrast to the Narrator’s submissive behaviour. The protagonist is a self-proclaimed “slave of consumerism”, and is discontent with his consumerist job as a traveling salesman. The Narrator responds to this challenge by finding emotional relief as an imposter in various support groups, with a montage of close-up shots portraying him hugging and comforting others in distress. In contrast, Tyler responds by pushing back against consumerist and capitalist society by assuming a position of authority over other distressed individuals and developing a Fight Club, with a scene of him fighting such individuals shot in alternation between rotating high angle shots and extreme close ups to accentuate his struggle. The Narrator initially responds to the Fight Club by embracing it, as a close up shot of his figure shows him smirking at the mayhem caused by the club. However, he responds differently once he absorbs the vandalism and harm resulting from the Fight Club, with the film climaxing in a close up of the Narrator disowning his alternate personality, accompanied by a tense score of high pitched strings to starkly contrast their characters. Therefore, the differing responses of the protagonist’s split personas reveals the diverse ways individuals push back against society.

Thus, both The Merchant of Venice and Fight Club explore how individuals respond in diverse ways to perceived challenges as they resist and push back against society to various extents, in order to compel us to critically consider our conventional beliefs and the universality of the human condition.

Narratives shape our reality by manipulatively influencing the thoughts and feelings of responders, as well as deceiving individuals' perceptions of and experiences with each other. William Shakespeare’s tragic play Othello (1604) conveys to responders the manipulative power of narratives in influencing the thoughts and feelings individuals direct towards marginalised people, ultimately leading to narratives which transcend time. As well as this, Othello portrays the romantic influence narratives can have as they deceive individuals’ thoughts and feelings towards each other, leading to jealousy. Romaine Moreton’s Are You Beautiful Today (2001) reveals the negative influence prevalent traditional white narratives have on the experiences and feelings of her people, and through this illuminates to responders the suppressed Aboriginal struggle in post-colonial Australia.

Through Othello, Shakespeare illustrates the manipulative power of narratives to influence the thoughts and feelings responders have towards marginalised individuals, ultimately creating narratives which transcend time. Shakespeare demonstrates the ability for narratives to influence an audience’s perspective through his usage of “in medias res” in the opening, whereby the audience’s view of Othello is shaped by Iago and Roderigo’s characterisation of him. This is evident through Roderigo’s damning characterisation of Othello as “thick lips” and a “moor” - the racial epithets contextually reflecting the common disdain held towards individuals of Othello’s race in order to build an initial negative narrative around the protagonist. Furthermore, the manipulative power of narratives is depicted through the duplicity of Iago, evident in the racial color imagery in the metaphor “When devils will the blackest sins \ they do [...] with heavenly shows”, reflecting his two-faced nature in manipulating Othello. Shakespeare also portrays how individuals build lasting cultural narratives that marginalise others in order to influence and manipulate responders’ thoughts and feelings. This is highlighted through the enjambment in Iago’s dialogue to Othello “In Venice they do let God see the pranks \ They dare not show their husbands” whereby Iago builds a lasting cultural narrative diminishing the reputation of Venetian women in order to argue Desdemona’s disloyalty, reflecting the cultural expectation for Venetian women to be subversive and sneaky, and also marginalising Othello. Thus, throughout Othello, Shakespeare depicts the ability for narratives to influence responders’ thoughts and feelings by manipulating and marginalising individuals.

Throughout Othello, Shakespeare illustrates how narratives can romantically influence and deceive individuals’ thoughts and feelings towards each other, ultimately leading to jealousy. The romantic power narratives have is illustrated through the parallelism “She loved me for the dangers I had passed, and I loved her that she did pity them”, revealing how Othello seduced Desdemona through his story-telling ability. Cultural narratives influence individuals’ romantic feelings, leading to jealousy. This is evident through the biblical allusion to “Heaven” in “In Venice they do let heaven see the pranks \ They dare not show their husbands”, whereby Iago builds on the contextual narrative of Venetian women being dishonest to make Desdemona seem promiscuous, thus leading to Othello’s jealousy. Furthermore, the power cultural narratives have to deceive individuals’ perceptions of each other is furthered through the racial colour imagery in the metaphor “turn her virtue into pitch”, whereby Iago contrasts the cultural narrative of Venetian women being subversive to plan their demise, reflecting his jealousy. However, narratives which romantically grip individuals, like Othello, influence their thoughts and feelings by blinding them with ignorance to their fateful situations. Iago’s deceptive narrative highlights Othello’s lack of understanding of his situation, evident in his demands for “ocular proof” dissolving into acknowledgement of Desdemona’s “cold chastity” after Iago’s deception is revealed. Even after Iago is deemed guilty, Othello cannot understand his situation, invoking the imperative in “demand this demi-devil / why he hath enslaved my soul and body”, revealing the absolute power narratives hold in deceiving individuals. Thus, Shakespeare’s Othello reveals the romantic influence narratives have, and depicts how narratives can ultimately deceive individuals thoughts and feelings regarding others.

In Are You Beautiful Today, Moreton illustrates how traditional white narratives prevalent in Australia negatively influence the experiences of her people, and by doing so illuminates to responders the Aboriginal struggle in post-colonial Australia. White narratives entrenched in Australia marginalise the Aboriginal experience and their connection to the land, suppressing their expression of discontented thoughts and feelings. This is evident through the cynical, sarcastic tone in “our laughter Shakes the hills [...] And his blissful screams”, alluding to her people’s unbroken spiritual connection to the land to illustrate their facade of happiness despite the pain endured through their marginalisation post-colonisation. Furthermore, the suppression of the Aboriginal experience due to the cultural narratives of post-colonial Australia, normalising substance abuse in Moreton’s communities, is evident in the similes “Like an injection, \ Like an infection”, juxtaposing the gloomy act of injecting drugs to her innocent act of “laughing” through the hardships. However, through her narration of the Aboriginal struggle, Moreton influences responders to consider the prejudice imposed on her people, encouraging change. Moreton narrates society’s dismissal of her people to responders through the metaphor “I’ve had to \ Cross coals and attitudes”. The coupling of hot coals and attitudes depicts the struggles of her people in relation to the bad attitudes and inferior treatment they experience, influencing responders to reflect on their treatment of Moreton’s community. Furthermore, the underrepresentation of Aboriginal struggles in mainstream narratives, influencing a lack of care towards Moreton’s people, is evident through the casual tone in the rhetorical “Discussing jail and suicide as through asking \ One lump or two?” The juxtaposition between the polite conversations of the privileged and the normalized gloomy conversations her people have of their struggles prompts the audience to re-examine society’s treatment of marginalised populations. Thus, Moreton represents the narrative voice of her people in Are You Beautiful Today, depicting the struggle experienced by Aboriginal people to influence responders’ thoughts and feelings to their treatment, thus promoting change.

Thus, both Shakespeare’s Othello and Moreton’s Are You Beautiful Today illustrate how narratives can be manipulated to influence the thoughts and feelings responders have towards others, particularly marginalised populations. By doing so, both Shakespeare and Moreton encourage readers to critically consider their conventional beliefs, ultimately promoting change in their respective social contexts. Through Othello, Shakespeare portrays to responders how narratives can be manipulated to influence the thoughts and feelings directed towards marginalised people. Shakespeare also highlights the deceiving nature of narratives, and the romantic influence they can have on individuals' thoughts and feelings towards each other, ultimately leading to jealousy. Moreton’s Are You Beautiful Today depicts the negative influence prevalent traditional white narratives have on the thoughts and feelings directed towards her people in contemporary Australia, and thus illuminates to responders the suppressed struggle of the Aboriginal community in post-colonial Australia.

True ‘ideal worlds’ are restricted by the desire to conform to and propagate prominent ideals and values held within such ‘ideal worlds’, not by the dream about what could be outside of those ideals and values. Huxley’s Brave New World (1932) illustrates how authority figures constrict ‘ideal worlds’ through the circular propagation of expected values in society. Huxley also portrays how ‘ideal worlds’ are restricted as individuals are trapped by desire and expectation to conform. Miller’s Death of a Salesman (1949) illustrates how ‘ideal worlds’ are constricted by the desire to fulfill the expectations of materialism and superficiality associated with the corrupted American Dream.

Influenced by the increasingly impersonal nature of the assembly-line industry, Huxley created an “ideal” world in which creativity and individuality were structurally eliminated, revealing how ‘ideal worlds’ limit individuals by the trap for authoritarian figures to propagate values expected to society. Authority figures restrict ‘ideal worlds’ through the desire to cyclically enforce propaganda, evident in the indoctrination of conformity in the repetition of “everyone works for everyone else”, a hypnopaedic message whispered to Lenina to instill society's expectations of communal-ownership. The nature for individuals in power to restrict ‘ideal worlds’ by imposing values expected by society, through the use of technology, is portrayed in the nefarious and colloquial tone of “Nothing like oxygen-shortage for keeping an embryo below par.” This details the cyclical reinforcement of class stratification to restrict the ‘ideal world’, echoing the prevalent contextual belief in scientific advances to solve suffering post-WWI. Therefore, through Brave New World, Huxley depicts how ‘ideal worlds’ are constricted by the desire for authority figures to cyclically propagate values society has come to expect as a result of indoctrination.

In Brave New World, Huxley illustrates how ‘ideal worlds’ enforce conformity to restrict individuals due to the trap of the desire to conform to expected ideals. This is evident as Lenina is restricted due to her indoctrinated expectations of cleanliness, whereby she repeats the hypnopaedic phrase “but cleanliness is next to lordliness” despite being separated from civilisation. ‘Ideal worlds’ enforcing conformity restrict individuals due to the desire and expectation to conform, evident in the hypnopaedic axiom “when the individual feels, society reels”, illustrating how the trap to fulfil expectations of conformity restricts emotion and individuality in ‘ideal worlds’. Huxley illustrates the ability for individuals to rise past the enforced values in ‘ideal worlds’ through the dream of what could be. This is evident through the anaphora and asyndeton in John the Savage’s protests against the ironically dehumanised state of human society—“I want poetry, I want real danger, I want freedom”—whereby he directly confronts the authoritarian controller and dreams past the indoctrinated values society conforms to. Thus, through Brave New World, Huxley demonstrates how ‘ideal worlds’ are fundamentally restricted by the trap of individuals conforming to ideals presented to them, not by the dream about what could be.

Death of a Salesman portrays how ‘ideal worlds’ can be constricted by expectations of materialism and superficiality rooted in modern society due to the trap of the corrupted American Dream. Individuals’ views of each other in ‘ideal worlds’ are restricted by the materialistic desire to fulfill the expectations of the American Dream, evident in Willy’s rhetorical “How can he see himself on a farm [...] thirty-five dollars a week,” depicting Willy’s disdain for Biff due to his lack of prestige, money and status. This is furthered through the exclamation and anaphora in “My God! [...] When he smiled [...] When he walked”, wherein Willy’s view on Biff is corrupted through a superficial lens due to his pursuit for status, contextually reflected in the reimagining of the American Dream as a quest for materialistic and superficial pleasures in the 1900s. Miller depicts how ‘ideal worlds’ are restricted as they delude individuals’ due to the desire and expectation to gain status and fame, which has become ingrained in the corrupted American Dream. This is evident through Willy’s reliance on superficial self-valuations, depicted in the postural imagery in the exclamatory listing “[Straightening up] Ben, that funeral will be massive! They’ll come from Maine, Massachusetts [...]”, where Willy lists his self-claimed fame in a delusional episode. This is sharply contrasted against the sombre tone in the rhetorical “Why didn’t anybody come?”, revealing the lack of presence at Willy’s funeral to illustrate how ‘ideal worlds’ are restricted as they deceive an individual’s sense of reality. However, those in an ‘ideal world’ are not constricted by their dreams of what could be, evident in the emotive tone in Biff’s rhetorical “I looked at the pen [...], what the hell am I grabbing this for? [...] all I want is out there”. The pen metaphorically represents Willy’s corrupted envisioning of the American Dream; Biff’s sudden detachment illustrates how he is not restricted to pursue a non-conforming, humble farming life. Therefore, Miller reveals how ‘ideal worlds’ are constricted by the trap of the corrupted American Dream, due to the idealistic pursuit and expectations of status and materialistic pleasure in Huxley’s America.

‘Ideal worlds’ are constricted by individuals’ and authority figures’ desires to enforce and abide by prominent values held and expected by their societies, not by dreams of non-conforming realities. This is reflected in Brave New World through the depiction of an ‘ideal’ world where creativity and individuality has been structurally eliminated, and in Death of a Salesman through an ‘ideal world’ where the American Dream has been corrupted through a materialistic and superficial lens.

In The Humans, Matt Haig confronts readers with an ideal world in which humans are paradoxically alienated in order to contrast the flaws in human behaviour and anatomy with the nature of humans to find meaning in life, thus provoking responders to re-evaluate the value of human life by finding beauty in our own imperfections. In doing so, he challenges the encouragement of conformity and superficiality within our society’s prevailing views on human nature. Haig also prompts readers to re-evaluate the idealisation of our current human society and to embrace the flaws of human life instead of striving for perfection.

Throughout The Humans, Haig provokes readers to re-evaluate the conformity to high beauty standards and the superficiality of human life, values which are held in our modern society, through the paradoxical presentation of an ideal world in which humans are viewed as the alien life forms. The beauty standards of modern society are presented as outrageous through the visual imagery in the grotesque depictions of human life present throughout the text - “hideous curiosities”, “protuberant central nose, thin-skinned lips.” Haig contrasts against the context of society’s evaluation of each other based on arbitrary beauty standards by presenting humans as all being similarly malformed. Furthermore, Haig rejects the superficiality of humans through the paradoxical alienation of human customs in “their conversation topics are very rarely the things they want to be talking about.” The judgemental tone depicts the superficiality of humans, causing readers to re-evaluate their social customs. Haig further illustrates the outrageous beauty standards of modern society in the hyperbole “I could write ninety-seven books on body shame and clothing etiquette before you would get even close to understanding them,” directly depicting the over the top standards of beauty humans place on each other. Thus, through The Humans, Haig paradoxically presents an ideal world in which humans are alienated in order to prompt responders to re-evaluate the value of human life, particularly the superficiality and high beauty standards imposed on society.

Through The Humans, Haig presents an ideal world where humans are not at the top of the hierarchy in order to prompt readers to re-evaluate the view of human society as being the greatest civilisation. Haig utilises the narrative voice of an extraterrestrial life form to ironically alienate the species of humans to the human audience throughout the text, evident in the derogatory evaluation of humans in “a human is a real bipedal life form of midrange intelligence”. Through this, Haig contrasts the modern view of our species as an advanced civilisation by ironically depicting humans in the way that we have historically and contextually depicted every other species on Earth (as being somewhat lesser), thus provoking responders to re-evaluate the importance of humans in the universe. Furthermore, Haig reflects on the need for humans to “cherish” our flaws instead of responding with “fear” and “ridicule”. This is evident in the rhetorical question “what if there actually is a meaning to human life?” which sharply contrasts against the negative and dismal tone throughout the piece in order to prompt readers to re-evaluate the value of human life - that we should instead, again, “cherish” and find meaning in our flaws. Thus, throughout The Humans, Haig presents an ideal world where humans are negatively depicted in order to confront readers and cause them to evaluate the greatness of human society, ultimately reflecting on the true value of life and our flaws.

Thus, by highlighting the several flaws in human society through the paradoxical construction of an ideal world in which humans are alienated, Haig prompts readers to re-evaluate the value of life and to find beauty in our own imperfections. By doing so, he encourages readers to critically consider our conventional beliefs, ultimately promoting change in their social context. Through the text, Haig challenges the value of prevalent views on human life, particularly our society’s encouragement of conformity and superficiality. Haig leads responders to re-evaluate our own idealisation of modern society, thus causing us to reflect on and find meaning in our flaws.

Yes, it is all very amusing, in a painful kind of way...what if - humour me - life on Earth is something not just to fear and ridicule but also to cherish? What then?

You see, I have observed humans for many years - too many to count. I have observed them throughout centuries, from the societies of ancient Egypt to Rome through to the industrial revolution and now the technology boom. But one thing has remained primitively constant throughout time. You see, despite all of the advances humans have made in history, their nature has still remained the same. All of the societies I have observed have certainly had one fatal flaw. They have all viewed themselves as the greatest ever to live.

Now, you might be wondering about my purpose in writing this. You might think that I come from an ultra-modern society far more advanced than the primitive human mind can ever conceive of; although that is true. My purpose is not to enlighten humans of my people’s overwhelming technological advances - despite the fact that I know that if I ever came into contact with one of you, that would unfortunately be the first thing you ask for. Instead, my purpose is to understand the nature of human life and reflect on it - you see, I have learned a lot from my time here.

Initially I thought humans were one of the most primal, crude, underdeveloped, elementary species I have come across in my travels throughout the universe. Certainly, I thought to myself that it would be a waste of time to force myself to observe the hideous nature of your societies - the unbearably slow evolution and advancements, and the flaws present in each iteration. In fact I could spend all day, no, all year presenting the ugliness of The Humans. They are insufferably selfish, and this has shaped the development of their society with the rise of capitalism. Their bodies are primitive in every sense, and their appearance acts as a repellent - it is as if you and them are magnets with the same charge, on first observation you want to escape and look away as quickly as possible. But I am not here to list all of their flaws, despite the amusement such flaws have given me throughout the centuries I have been here.

You see, those who sent me and many of you reading know of humans as being a revolting, sickening life form. And that is certainly true. But the more time I have spent with them, the more time I have become accustomed to their customs. I have begun to understand their struggle, their way of life, and most importantly the unfortunate predicament God has placed on them. You see, despite their primitiveness, humans have one astonishing aspect about them that I haven’t been able to wrap my mind around until recently, which is why I am writing this now. Despite their hideous looks, all 5329 flaws they have (yes, I have been counting), and everything else I could list that is fundamentally wrong with them, they still power through and go about life as if yesterday was yesterday and the future is bright.

You see, I have observed that humans are very idealistic. In fact, they are the most idealistic society I have come across. Individual humans put aside their flaws and the flaws of others, and instead find meaning in the terrible predicament they have been put in. I could name 96 religions they have made to find meaning in their own life. It is certainly amazing how they can open their minds to put away all of their fears and all there is to ridicule about them, and instead cherish their own life and the various flaws they contain. And this is what I wish to enlighten you about.

In his utopian short story The Big Trip Up Yonder (1954), Kurt Vonnegut sharply contrasts the supposedly ideal nature of a society where ageing is halted, against its unexpectedly negative consequences. In doing so, he challenges the encouragement of conformity and immorality within capitalist society’s prevailing views on human nature. Through the medium of short story, Vonnegut critiques views which encourage conformity, revealing how they lead to superficiality in society. As well as this, Vonnegut condemns the negative consequences associated with capitalist greed and lack of morality stemming from it.

Through The Big Trip Up Yonder, Vonnegut’s establishment of an ‘ideal’ world in which ageing is halted allows him to critically challenge and oppose views on human nature which encourage conformity to societal aesthetic norms. This view is reflective of the context of 20th century beauty standards in America where Vonnegut grew up, whereby youthful appearance was encouraged as standard, and the cynical tone and flat characterisation in the story being largely reflective of pessimistic outlooks on society shaped by recent wars in WW2 and the ongoing Cold War. The unjust dehumanisation of individuals who do not meet rigid social standards of physical beauty is made evident through the contrasting of the imagery in Gramps’ “withered and bent” appearance to the youthful guise of his “heirs” who are “in their late twenties or early thirties”. Similarly, the disconnection of abnormal individuals to the rest of society is highlighted through the sarcastic tone in Lou’s dialogue “We said that a hundred years ago,” where he mocks Gramps, portraying his disdain for the great-grandfather. Vonnegut also depicts the superficiality encouraged by rigid standards imposed on society. This is evident in the family’s superficial care for their Grandfather, highlighted in the sharp contrast between the emotional tone in “He [Gramps] sniffed sentimentally”, to the cold tone in “poignancy of the Big Trip [Gramps’ death] had been dulled”, depicting the lack of care his family has for his struggle. Therefore, through The Big Trip Up Yonder, Vonnegut’s construction of a supposedly ‘ideal’ world allows him to critique views on human nature which encourage conformity, while highlighting the superficiality this encourages.

Through the construction of a supposedly ideal world and the starc portrayal of the world’s flaws, Vonnegut challenges how immorality is encouraged by prevailing views on human nature flowing from the context of our capitalist society, and by doing so highlights the negative effect capitalism and such views have on our living standards. This is contextually reflective of the capitalist America Vonnegut grew up in, with such society’s flaws leading him to favor socialism, as well as the rapid post-WWII population growth experienced in his time. The nature for the beneficial aspects of capitalist societies to blind them of the negatives is evident in the casual nature of the accumulation of all the family’s members living together—“mother, brother, sister-in-law, [...], nephew and wife, grandnephew and wife [...].” Vonnegut highlights how the utopian nature of the commoditised good “anti-gerasone” has caused society to dismiss the population bomb caused by such. Furthermore, the greed and lack of morality caused by capitalist incentives imposed by society is illustrated through the sharp contrast between Lou’s despair in the imagery as he “nodded dully” to retrieve Gramps’ will, with his father’s inability of “concealing his pleasure” as he “instantly offered” his pen to Gramps, grasping at the opportunity to move up the ‘hierarchy’ in Gramp’s will at the expense of his own son, reflecting the context of the incentive of inheritance in capitalist America. Furthermore, Vonnegut criticizes views on human nature which encourage immorality in the quest for monetary gains. This is evident in the demanding tone and visual imagery in “‘Get me my will [...]!’ Gramps snapped his gnarly fingers sharply”, negatively depicting the family’s immoral greed as a result of their idealisation of Gramps death for monetary gain, which has placed him in a position of power over them. Thus, The Big Trip Up Yonder contrasts the seemingly utopian nature of a society without ageing, against its negative consequences, thereby challenging views on human nature which encourage immorality through capitalist greed, and by doing so highlights society’s dismissal of the consequences of such prevailing views.

Thus, by highlighting flaws in a seemingly ideal constructed world, Vonnegut challenges our mass adherence to capitalist views of human nature that encourage conformity and incentivise harmful behaviours. By doing so, he encourages readers to critically consider their conventional beliefs, ultimately promoting change in their social context. Through the text, Vonnegut critiques society’s social norms, ultimately criticising the moral bankruptcy of capitalist motives which dominate society.

Ideal Worlds Choice of Text Justification
My choice of Kurt Vonnegut’s short story The Big Trip Up Yonder (1954) is justified, as by conceptualising a seemingly utopian future in which ageing is cured by the invention of a commoditized medicine called “anti-gerasone”, the text responds to the turbulent values of 20th century America through the construction of a deceptively “ideal” world.

The Big Trip Up Yonder embodies the module “Text, Culture and Values” through its reinforcement and reflection of Vonnegut’s contextual culture. The cynical tone and flat characterisation throughout the story are largely reflective of pessimistic outlooks on society shaped by the US’ post-WWII historical context as well as the ongoing Cold War. The story’s depiction of overpopulation caused by capitalism reflects the post-war population boom, both in Vonnegut’s America and throughout the world. Furthermore, Vonnegut’s criticism of greed reflects his anti-capitalist views. Thus Vonnegut’s text closely addresses the rubric due to its incorporation of embedded contextual values.

The text is constructed with the purpose of providing social commentary through an imagined future reality, thereby strongly reflecting the concept of “Ideal Worlds” outlined within the elective. The social commentary inherent to ideal worlds is conveyed through Vonnegut’s criticism of capitalism and of society’s rigid social standards, as well as his exploration of the immorality of greed. Furthermore, sci-fi conventions reflect the ideal rather than the realistic nature of Vonnegut’s constructed world, evident in the ability to medically control ageing and offset death in the constructed utopia of the text.

Therefore, my choice of text is justified, as it constitutes an ideal world in line with the demands of the elective. Reflecting Vonnegut’s personal, social and historical contexts, the text comments on our own world to encourage societal change.

In the dystopian world of Patrick Ness’s The Knife of Never Letting Go, the residents of Prentisstown can hear everyone else’s thoughts in an overwhelming, never-ending stream of “Noise”. The author’s frank, authentic portrayal of adolescent characters and their coming of age process lends it much value and significance to us teenage readers. The novel is of great value to me as it eloquently explores universal elements of the human condition in how authority figures manipulate our society by imposing their own ideas on children. This idea is especially relevant to us and is influenced by the context of the book’s writing due to the increasing polarisation of contemporary politics and the imposing of such ideas on us adolescents. As well as this, the novel is aesthetically valuable to me as it’s unique and insightful prose breaks from the typical nature of young adult literature to create a truly meaningful read.

The novel is valuable to me as it provides a compelling account of a world where people’s perceptions are systematically manipulated in order to hide the corruption of people in power, an idea universally relevant to the human condition. The protagonist, Todd, was brought up influenced by the lies of his town’s authority figure Mayor Prentiss. Before Todd’s birth, the Mayor had “decided to burn all the books”, symbolising the suppression of individual expression in Todd’s closed society. When Todd is forced to leave Prentisstown he encounters a woman named Hildy, which marks the beginning of his realisation that he has been lied to for his entire life. 

Todd had been taught from childhood to fear and hate the Spackle who are the native creatures of his world, as vicious aliens. However, this belief is challenged when after killing a spackle he learns that the creature is innocent as it’s “Noise is filled with bafflement and fear”. In his mother’s words the Spackle are actually “very sweet creachers” who, contrasting to the society’s teachings, are not “animals” but “intelligent beings”. The town’s attitudes towards the Spackle, who are thought of as “the Other”, give the text value as it opens up a new way of thinking in reference to the culturally significant idea that society can manipulate children by imposing its own hatred onto them, thereby perpetuating oppression, racism and violence based on ignorance.

As well as this, the text is especially valuable to me and other young readers as it is written in first person from the perspective of a coming-of-age teenage protagonist. This, as well as the stream of consciousness writing style creates aesthetic value as it allows me to easily connect to Todd’s thoughts and emotions. This value is furthered as the protagonist takes the role of an illiterate teenager, and the book’s stylistic diction reflects this, with its constant slang and spelling mistakes. In the first few pages, Todd states “I never ended up reading too good”. This unconventional narration enhances the reading experience by providing a believable and appropriate tone for an illiterate teenager, which in turn makes the text aesthetically pleasing as it creates more interest and relatability.

In conclusion, Patrick Ness’s substantial novel The Knife of Never Letting Go is a thrilling and fast paced novel which provides valuable insights into the human condition. The mature handling of themes relating to how our society imposes values onto children through means of manipulation, as well as the unique stylistic diction and first person flow lends the novel much value and  significance to me and other teenage readers, making it a worthy and valuable read.

Short films are a creative medium for social commentary which allows composers to utilize visual and aural means to provide comments on sociocultural issues in a manner which celebrates creativity. Juan Solanas’ short film L’Homme Sans Tête (2003) is a dystopian science fiction film critiquing society’s isolation of individuals who don’t conform to social aesthetic norms, and depicting their need to seek companionship. Similarly, Genevieve Clay-Smith’s short film Be My Brother (2009) explores the disdain for individuals who do not abide to rigid social standards, and the efforts to overcome such prejudices. Through the medium of short films, both texts utilize a range of aural and visual techniques in order to provide social commentary in a creative and engaging manner.

Through L’Homme Sans Tête, Solanas uses the medium of short films to provide social commentary critiquing how society encourages conformity to societal aesthetic norms, while celebrating creativity through the range of aural and visual techniques used. This is portrayed through the isolation of individuals who do not conform to rigid social standards of physical beauty. The zooming shot of the protagonist framed behind a barred window utilises connotations of bars as a form of imprisonment, symbolising how the protagonist is confined due to his headless body. Furthermore, the disconnection of abnormal individuals to the rest of society is emphasised through the positioning of the protagonist gazing outwards into the rest of the world, portraying how his attempts to connect with society are cut off due to his inability to conform to aesthetic standards. Solanas also depicts the desire for isolated humans to seek connection. The protagonist’s desire to break his isolation and seek companionship is shown through the recurring motif of the photo of the girl, which he holds close to his heart, showing his emotional and romantic attachment to the depicted woman despite his isolation from society. Furthermore, the value of relationships to isolated individuals is highlighted through the playful and romantic music played during the wide shot of the protagonist dancing in the confines of his apartment, depicting how the promise of connecting with another human and breaking his isolation has lifted him into a state of joy. However, Solanas ultimately portrays how individuals can overcome and form intimate connections despite restrictions imposed on them by society, evident in consecutive shots depicting the protagonist and his love holding hands at the end of the film, symbolising his ability to form relationships despite his abnormal body. Thus Solanas’ short film L’Homme Sans Tete critiques society’s rigid social and aesthetic standards, suggesting that they can be challenged and overcome by the end of the film.

Clay-Smith’s short film Be My Brother celebrates creativity through the use of a range of aural and visual techniques while providing social commentary on the disdain for individuals who do not conform to rigid social standards. This is portrayed through the dismissive attitude directed throughout the film towards these individuals. Such attitudes are evident in Amanda’s closed body language towards Richard, whereby the unnatural presentation of her figure, such as her crossed arms and lack of eye contact, indicates her attempt to separate herself from the protagonist. Clay-Smith further strengthens this idea through Damien’s embarrassed, withdrawn demeanour and dismissive tone in his response “no thanks” when confronted by Richard, portraying society’s prejudice towards the disabled. However, Be My Brother also depicts the desire for individuals such as Richard to overcome social standards and society’s prejudices against them. Richard’s desire to connect with others despite his inability to abide by society’s standards is portrayed through his persistent attempts to connect with Amanda, evident in his open and inviting tone in lines such as “All the time! I’m Richard” in response to her contrasting dismissive and condescending tone. Clay-Smith ultimately portrays how individuals can overcome and connect with others despite society’s prejudices against them due to their abnormalities, highlighted in Amanda’s relaxed posture and joyful appearance after Richard opens up to her through a series of personal disclosures, showing how he was able to overcome her natural prejudice against him. Thus Be My Brother criticizes society’s prejudice against individuals who cannot abide to rigid social standards, while suggesting that such prejudices can be overcome.

Short films celebrate creativity through a range of aural/visual techniques unique to the text type while serving as a platform for social commentary to composers, allowing them to provide comments and critique contemporary sociocultural issues, encouraging viewers to critically consider their conventional beliefs, ultimately promoting change. Both Clay-Smith’s short film Be My Brother and Solanas’ short film L’Homme Sans Tête respectively explore social issues about the prejudice and social isolation experienced by individuals due to their inability to conform to rigid social standards, as well as their ability to overcome such difficulties in order to connect and form relationships with other humans.

The American-North Vietnamese play is a historical adaptation of Romeo and Juliet, set during the middle of the Vietnam war in 1968. This period was a time of intense conflict between both parties, amplified by America’s strong stance against the Viet Cong. In our adaptation, Juliet is played by an upper class, relatively wealthy woman named Yen, exemplifying her innocent and peaceful nature. Yen stems from a traditional Viet Cong family in South Vietnam, who strongly opposes America and the South Vietnam government. However, her willingness to rebel against her family’s traditional values surfaces as she meets Francis, who comes from a lower class, American family. Francis holds traditional American patriotic values, influenced by his government’s strong opposition to communist parties, including the Viet Cong. Nevertheless, as both parties hold diverging beliefs and are traditionally opposed to each other, a conflict concerning their backgrounds stereotypically begins to emerge.

An integral aspect to the original Romeo and Juliet revolves around the theme of breaching one’s cultural regulations, reflected in our adaptation through the conflict between both parties, provoked by Yen and Francis’s differing backgrounds. This dispute evolves throughout the film, however is eventually conquered through Yen and Francis’s shared love for each other. For example, the cultural barrier separating both lovers is symbolised through the dense, tall forest landscape in the first scene which ironically contrasts against the bright daytime which they are situated in. However, their willingness to break one’s cultural traditions is later portrayed through the simple act of both lovers moving to a clear patch in the forest, further reinforcing the theme that love conquers hate.

The lover’s differing cultures and beliefs are characterised by their contrasting clothing, which represents their separate traditions and backgrounds. This visual contrast assists in characterising both characters as having conflicting viewpoints and character traits, which ultimately clash when they meet. For example, Yen wears a customary Vietnamese dress called Ao Dai, representing her traditional Vietnamese background, which is directly contrasted against Francis’s clothing, composed of a flannel shirt and casual jeans. Furthermore, Yen’s passion and lust for Francis is portrayed through her clothing in the final death scene, whereby she wears a bright red Ao Dai, contrasting against the pitch-black midnight to symbolise that love prevails even in the darkest of circumstances.

When Yen and Francis last meet, they are situated in a pitch-black cemetery in the middle of the night, with the only light coming from Francis’ burning candle, symbolising that the lovers were brought together by fate in a cruel world. The prominent theme that their love prospers through darkness is portrayed through the intense and passionate non-diegetic music engulfing the last scene, building up to a climax with their final kiss, further depicting their fate-driven love.

Journeys are often challenging and characterised by hardship, but can ultimately broaden the individuals identity and their perspective of the world. Anh Do’s memoir The Happiest Refugee explores how challenges associated with journeys can renew an individual’s identity. Similarly, Peter Skrzynecki’s poems Migrant Hostel and Sailing to Australia depict how journeys which challenge individuals are often dehumanizing and can result in a loss of identity. These texts demonstrate how individuals are physically and emotionally challenged through journeys.

Although journeys are often challenging and characterised by hardship, the new experiences encountered ultimately broaden the individual’s identity and their perspective of the world around them. A major challenge Do encounters is racism, illustrated through the condescending dialogue “we don’t really like your types in here”. The diction of “type” reveals the overt racism experienced by foreigners and highlights Do’s increasing worries about how others racially judge his family. However, these challenging and often dehumanizing experiences ultimately help to positively shape Do’s personal identity and his perception of Australia, allowing him to become more resilient. His maturing perception of racism in Australia is depicted through the reflective tone in “with racism in Australia [...] there are one-off incidences [...] but wider Australia is appalled by it”, which reveals his revelation that Australia is generally welcoming of foreigners. Similarly, valuable life lessons can be gained through the challenges and hardship associated with journeys, evident in the hypothetical “younger, angrier, teenage Anh might’ve taken a swing” which contrasts Anh Do’s past self with his current self. Through this, Do depicts how his many challenging racist encounters in Australia has taught him how to deal with racism thus teaching him resilience and self-control. Furthermore, Do uses the challenges he faces during his journey in Australia as an opportunity to expand his knowledge, evident in the imperative dialogue “Learn from them Anh, treat them like a rare gift” which utilizes a simile to depict how Anh learns from his hard comedy gigs. Therefore, the many experiences Anh Do encounters illustrates how journeys which challenge individuals can renew their individual identity and imbue them with valuable life lessons.

Throughout the poem Migrants Hostel, Peter Skrzynecki explores how challenging journeys can cause a loss of individual identity and belonging. This is expressed through the metonym of nationalities in “Nationalities sought each other out instinctively”, which highlights how the immigrants are searching for others from their country in order to regain their personal identity. Similarly, the sense of belonging migrants desire during their journey away from home is illustrated through the visual imagery in the simile “like a homing pigeon circling to get its bearings”, which portrays how journeys can cause a loss of purpose and identity. As well as this, Skrzynecki explores how journeys can be characterised by a lack of agency and control. This is depicted through the metaphor “unaware of the season whose track we would follow”, which illustrates the uncertainty associated with the immigrant’s journey. Similarly, the immigrant’s lack of power over their personal journey is portrayed through the metaphor “as it [the gate] rose and fell like a finger pointed in reprimand or shame”, which portrays their lack of choice regarding their freedom as they are trapped in the hostel. Therefore, Migrants Hostel depicts how journeys can result in a loss of belonging and identity, as well as their often uncertain nature.

Throughout the poem Sailing to Australia, Peter Skrzynecki depicts how journeys are often challenging and characterised by hardship, tension and aspiration. The hope and faith required during long trials is portrayed through the symbolism of manna as a form of hope in the biblical allusion to “salt / that crystalised into manna / on their tongues and in their eyes”, which likens the immigrants’ journey to the biblical Exodus of the Israelite people from slavery in Egypt. Furthermore, the hardship of journeys is characterised through the visual imagery in “seeing aeroplanes / lying broken in a forest”, which emphasises the terror associated with the immigrant’s post WW2 experience. Furthermore, the dehumanizing and tense nature of long journeys is depicted through the imagery in “disguised nationalities”, which symbolises the immigrants’ fear of exclusion leading them to hide their identity. As well as this, the often dehumanizing nature of journeys is expressed through the enjambment in “we had no names / a tattooed number” which emphasizes the immigrants’ lack of identity. Therefore, the hardship and tension associated with journeys which challenge individuals is depicted through the poem Sailing to Australia.

While the experiences faced on journeys can be challenging, they ultimately renew the individual’s identity and perspective of the world around them. Do’s The Happiest Refugee explores how challenging journeys can widen an individual’s identity. Similarly, Skrzynecki’s Migrant Hostel and Sailing to Australia depict how journeys can be challenging and dehumanizing, and often result in a loss of identity.

The novel Incognito by Claire Carmichael (2000) explores contemporary social issues regarding the misuse of power and conformity, as well as the importance of individual identity. Through this, Carmichael encourages readers to critically consider the conventional beliefs towards power, conformity and individual identity, ultimately promoting change. Throughout the text, Carmichael challenges the legitimacy of people in power by revealing the differing social standards between the upper strata and the rest of society. Furthermore, by depicting the fictional society’s varying responses to the suppression of individual identity, Carmichael reveals how our perspective on society is shaped by our identity. As well as this, conformity is challenged by the depiction of how its enforcement is detrimental to individual freedom, autonomy and privacy.

Through the novel, Carmichael depicts how the upper strata of society does not have to conform to their society’s standards of behaviour and ethical obligations, and by doing so challenges the reader’s faith in powerful individuals. The oppressive nature of the upper echelon of society is depicted through the visual imagery in the metaphor “The [data lord’s] office on the top floor [...] was flooded with light”, which is later contrasted against the dismal tone and strong visual imagery in the simile “khaki layer of pollution hung like a dingy sheet” in order to depict the social disparity between the powerful leader’s affluent lifestyle and the dismal conditions of the rest of society. Similarly, the differing standards of the powerful and the powerless people is portrayed through the assistant’s addressal of the data lord through the pseudonym “Lord Alpha”, which depicts him as a secretive body shroud in mystery, contrasting against the commonly taught notion that “nothing should be secret”. Furthermore, Carmichael reveals how the powerful does not have to conform to society’s standards through the visual imagery and sibilance in “he [the data lord] snarled, spittle spraying”, which exposes the controlling and inhumane nature of the data lord. This is later emphasised by the rhetorical question “You really think you can beat a data lord?”, which depicts how the powerful are protected by their elevated status. Therefore, through the novel Incognito, Carmichael challenges the legitimacy of people in power by depicting how the social standards and obligations of the upper echelon of society vastly differs from that of the rest of society.

Throughout Incognito, Carmichael challenges the notion of individual identity by revealing how it shapes our perspective on the flaws of society. The fact that the denying of fundamental human rights leads to questioning of the underlying system is revealed through the metaphor “But his brief taste as an oblit had shaken his view of his safe, comfortable world”, which depicts how Karr’s shift in social status to an oppressed position caused him to reconsider the distribution of justice within his society’s social structure. Similarly, the limited perspective of the privileged is conveyed as causing them to be oblivious to the injustices of their society, evident in the hypothetical dialogue “Brenna visualised herself yelling, ‘You’re all brainwashed! [...]”, which utilizes emotive language to depict the ignorant nature of the brainwashed students. Furthermore, Carmichael reveals how the denying of a society’s rights leads to the realisation of how important they are through the accumulation of rhetorical questions “How could oblits live [...]? Where did they [...]? How could they [...]?”, in which Karr’s newfound identity as an oblit causes him to question the lack of entitlements of those at the bottom of the social hierarchy. As well as this, the rebellion caused when individuals are faced with oppression is emphasized through the cumulative listing in the dialogue “We have Incognito members in communications, education, finance, transport [...]”, which reveals how the “Incognito” group represents the fight back caused by the oppression of individual identity. Therefore, throughout Incognito, Carmichael exposes how our perspective on society is shaped by our individual identity.

Throughout the novel, the enforcement of conformity is challenged through its depiction as inherently suppressing individual freedom, autonomy and privacy. The fact that conformity exists at the expense of autonomy and individual freedom is revealed through the anaphora of “nothing” in “Nothing is secret. Nothing should be secret”, which depicts the social conditioning of society to conform to the objectives of those in power. Similarly, the notion of conformity is challenged through the depiction of the government as disregarding individual freedom and privacy, evident in the chiasmus of the government’s catchcry “Hiding Nothing is Nothing To Hide”. Furthermore, the suppression of autonomy and privacy caused by the enforcement of conformity is revealed through the anthropomorphised metaphor “Not here, the walls have ears”, which depicts how the constant surveillance against residents is negatively influencing their actions. As well as this, the fact that conformity is detrimental to free speech and autonomy is conveyed through the anaphora of “same” in the explanatory dialogue “Homogeneity […] Essentially together, with the same purpose, same direction”, whereby students are indoctrinated with the values of those in power, causing the suppression of individual identity. Therefore, Carmichael encourages the reader to reconsider the importance of conformity by revealing how its enforcement is detrimental to individual freedom, autonomy and privacy.

The text Incognito provides readers with an extensive insight into contemporary social issues regarding power, conformity and individual identity, and by doing so prompts readers to challenge the conventional beliefs, ultimately promoting change in their social context. By depicting how the upper strata of society does not have to conform to their society’s ethical obligations and standards of behaviour, Carmichael challenges the legitimacy of people in power. Furthermore, Carmichael reveals how our individual identity shapes our perspective on society by portraying the fictional society’s responses to the suppression of their individual identity. As well as this, conformity is challenged throughout the text by its depiction as being detrimental towards individual freedom, autonomy and privacy.

In the dystopian world of Patrick Ness’s The Knife of Never Letting Go, the residents of Prentisstown can hear everyone else’s thoughts in an overwhelming, never-ending stream of “Noise”. The author’s frank, authentic portrayal of adolescent characters and their coming of age process lends it much value and significance to teenage readers. The novel eloquently explores how authority figures manipulate our society by imposing their own ideas on children. Combined with this, the novel’s unique and insightful prose breaks from the typical nature of young adult literature to create a truly meaningful read.

The novel provides a compelling account of a world where people’s perceptions are systematically manipulated in order to hide the corruption of people in power. The protagonist was brought up influenced by the lies of his town’s authority figure Mayor Prentiss. Before Todd’s birth, the Mayor had “decided to burn all the books”, symbolising the suppression of individual expression in Todd’s closed society. When Todd is forced to leave Prentisstown he encounters a woman named Hildy, which marks the beginning of his realisation that he has been lied to for his entire life. 

Todd had been taught from childhood to fear and hate the Spackle who are the native creatures of his world, as vicious aliens. However, this belief is challenged when after killing a spackle he learns that the creature is innocent as it’s “Noise is filled with bafflement and fear”. In his mother’s words the Spackle are actually “very sweet creatures” who, contrasting to the society’s teachings, are not “animals” but “intelligent beings”. The town’s attitudes towards the Spackle, who are thought of as “the Other”, reflect how society can impose its own hatred onto children and thereby perpetuate oppression, racism and violence based on ignorance.

To relate to young readers Patrick Ness writes in first person from the perspective of the protagonist. This allows the reader to easily connect to Todd’s thoughts and emotions, and fits the storyline well as the novel is very fast paced and in-the-moment. The protagonist takes the role of an illiterate teenager, and the book’s stylistic diction reflects this, with its constant slang and spelling mistakes. In the first few pages, Todd states “I never ended up reading too good”. This unconventional narration enhances the reading experience by providing a believable and appropriate tone for an illiterate teenager, which in turn creates more interest and relatability within the text.

In conclusion, Patrick Ness’s substantial novel The Knife of Never Letting Go is a thrilling and fast paced novel which shouldn’t be missed. It won the Guardian Children's Fiction Prize in 2008, and its critical acclaim is certainly well deserved. The mature handling of themes relating to how our society imposes values onto children through means of manipulation, as well as the unique stylistic diction and first person flow lends the novel much significance and value to teenage readers, making it a worthy and valuable read.

The coming-of-age fiction To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee (1960) explores social issues which have lasting value from the twentieth century into the modern day. Through the text, Lee not only explores the racial discrimination and judicial bias against African Americans, but also describes the importance of being sympathetic and understanding towards others, and by doing so highlights the significance of moral education and how it influences our society. Through her depiction of African Americans as being at the bottom of Maycomb’s social hierarchy, as well as her emphasis on the racial bias against African Americans, Lee also expresses the inequalities of different cultures, as well as the prejudice against non Anglo Saxons.

Through the novel, Lee highlights the racial discrimination and judicial bias against African Americans, and by doing so reveals how our prejudice against other cultures is instilled in our society. The judicial bias against African Americans is expressed through the metaphor “people have a way of carrying their resentments right into a jury box”, which reveals how our bias against non Anglo Saxon cultures is instilled in our society. Similarly, the destructive effects of racial and judicial bias are highlighted through the strong visual imagery and emotive language in “His shoulders jerked as if each ‘guilty’ was a separate stab between them”, which criminalises and causes the reader to sympathise for Tom Robinson, a victim of judicial bias found guilty of a crime he hasn’t committed. Furthermore, the prejudice against non Anglo Saxon cultures is emphasized through the strong language and assertive tone in “Cry about the hell white people give colored folks, without even stopping to think that they’re people, too”, which reveals how the racial discrimination against non-white cultures is ingrained in our society. Therefore, Lee highlights how our judicial bias and racial discrimination against non Anglo Saxons is fundamentally instilled in our society through the text To Kill a Mockingbird.

Throughout the novel, Lee expresses the importance of moral education through her characterisation of Atticus as a moral educator who devotes himself to instilling a social conscience in his children Jem and Scout. The effect of moral education on our society’s youth is depicted through the transition of Atticus’s children from being innocent at the beginning of the story to realising the harsh reality of modern society, being the “hell white people give colored folks”, through Maycomb’s teachings. This is expressed through the children’s initial fear of Boo Radley, an inhabitant of Maycomb who is thought of as insane by most, which is later juxtaposed against the children’s defending of Boo Radley once they have learned the harsh reality of life in Maycomb, where they state that hurting him would “be sort of like shootin’ a mockingbird”. Furthermore, the constructive outcomes of moral education, being the importance of persevering and being understanding towards other, is expressed through the hyperbolic metaphor “Simply because we were licked a hundred years before we started is no reason for us not to try to win”, which depicts how instead of accepting the convention of discriminating against the African American community, Atticus, a symbol of morality and justice in Maycomb, chooses to protect them. By depicting Atticus as a moral educator, Lee expresses the importance of moral education in our modern society.

The text To Kill a Mockingbird provides readers with an extensive insight into social issues relevant in the twentieth century and in our modern society, and by doing so encourages responders to critically consider the social impacts of our modern lifestyle, ultimately promoting change in their social context. Through her depiction of African Americans as being at the bottom of Maycomb’s social hierarchy, Lee highlights the racial discrimination and judicial bias against non Anglo Saxon cultures. Similarly, by emphasising Atticus’s preachings and by describing the transition of Atticus’s children from being innocent to realising the harsh reality of life, Lee depicts the significance of moral education and highlights the importance of being sympathetic and understanding towards others.

The poem We are going by Oodgeroo Noonuccal explores the destructive effects that the british colonisation of Australia had on the Aboriginal culture and land. By revealing the dictatorship of the British over the Aboriginals, Noonuccal exposes the fallacy of Australian stereotypes, and conveys to the reader the marginalisation of the Aboriginal culture in Australia. Furthermore, the poem’s contrast between Australia’s indifference to the environment and the importance of the land to the Aborigines portrays to the reader the destruction of Aboriginal values caused by British colonisation.

Through the poem, Noonuccal depicts the marginalisation of the Aboriginal culture in Australia, and reveals the dictatorship of the “white men” over the Aboriginals. The sibilance and imagery in “A semi-naked band subdued and silent” portrays the Aborigines as being powerless and insignificant, and shows how they don’t have a voice in our society. Similarly, the metaphor “We are the shadow-ghosts creeping back as the campfires burn low” uses visual imagery to portray the Aborigines as outliers who have no say in our society and are disregarded by the rest of Australia. In addition, the simile “Where now the many white men hurry about like ants” portrays the impulsive and reckless nature of “white men”, and causes the reader to sympathise with the Aborigines who have lost their homeland to the western colonisation. By depicting the marginalisation of the Aboriginal culture in Australia, Noonuccal frames our national identity as being negatively affected by the eradication of the indigenous culture.

Throughout the poem We are going, Noonuccal contrasts the importance of the land to the Aborigines with Australia’s disregard for the environment, and by doing so portrays Australia’s dismissal of traditional Aboriginal values to the viewer. This is shown through the irony in “Notice of the estate agent reads: Rubbish May Be Tipped Here. / Now it half covers the traces of the old bora ring”, which depicts Australia’s disregard for the values of the Aboriginal culture. Furthermore, the author contrasts the modern dismissal of Aboriginal values with the importance of the Aboriginal identity through the repetition of “we are” in “We belong here, we are of the old ways. / We are the corroboree [...]”. Similarly, the disregard for the Aboriginal culture is highlighted through the repetition of the word “gone” in “The scrubs are gone [...] The eagle is gone [...] The bora ring is gone [...] The corroboree is gone”. By depicting the modern dismissal of Aboriginal values, Noonuccal highlights the marginalised voice of the Aboriginal culture in Australia.

By exposing the dominance of the British over Aboriginal Australians, Noonuccal portrays the marginalisation of the Aboriginal culture in Australia. Similarly, she highlights the modern dismissal of Aboriginal values by contrasting the importance of the land to the Aborigines against Australia’s disregard for the environment and the traditional inhabitants of Australia. Through this, Noonuccal subverts the stereotypical image of the Australian national identity, and ultimately depicts our country as being negatively influenced by the suppression of its indigenous culture.

The novel Trash by Andy Mulligan (2010) and the film Wall-E by Andrew Stanton (2008) both explore important social and environmental issues throughout their respective texts. Through this, they encourage viewers to reconsider the conventional beliefs, ultimately promoting change in their social context. The extreme disparity between the rich and poor, relating to the social inequality of Behala, as well as the uncontrolled pollution and absence of sustainability in our society is highlighted throughout the text Trash. Similarly, Stanton emphasizes the overwhelming pollution of our world, and the power and corruption of our leaders in the film Wall-E. Through this, both Stanton and Mulligan express the mass pollution and lack of sustainability in our modern world, and while Stanton emphasizes the evident power and corruption of our leaders, Mulligan depicts the social inequalities of our society.

Andy Mulligan expresses the polluted and unsustainable state of our society through his fictional depiction of the Behala dumpsite. The diction in “it’s a place they call Behala, and it’s the rubbish-town” draws the reader’s attention to the rubbish-filled dumpsite in order to convey its dismal and polluted state. Likewise, the hyperbolic metaphor “one whole long world of steaming trash” utilizes visual imagery and graphic sensory to evoke the confronting conditions of people living in Behala by characterizing the area as unsustainable and polluted. Furthermore, the repetition and alliteration in “Trash bags get loaded onto carts, and from carts onto trucks or even trains'' further emphasizes the polluted state of Behala, and confronts the audience with the undesirable consequences of unconstrained pollution in our society. The polluted environment and lack of sustainability depicted in Mulligan’s Trash reflects our society’s environmental concerns in an effort to prompt audiences to reconsider their social context, ultimately encouraging change in our society.

Similarly, Stanton explores the overwhelming pollution of our world throughout his film Wall-E. The establishing shot of the congested wasteland of Earth sharply juxtaposes against the recurring, non-diegetic and optimistic soundtrack, introducing the severe effects of mass consumerism and unconstrained waste-disposal to the audience. Furthermore, the recurring motif of the cockroaches as indestructible figures in a world of mass garbage and pollution further emphasizes the dismal, barren and lifeless state of Earth. In the aerial shot of Eve’s rocket landing on Earth, the dull, brown-tinted colors and large dust clouds emphasize the polluted state of the area, conveying the mass pollution and dismal state of the planet to the audience. In addition, the symbolism of the solemn plant as the only life left on the planet represents the fractured state of Earth and its evident lack of sustainability, conveying to the audience the catastrophic effects of ignoring prominent issues relating to pollution and sustainability in our society. By depicting the polluted and unsustainable state of Earth, Stanton reflects our society’s environmental concerns in the film Wall-E.

Mulligan expresses the social inequalities of our society throughout his fictional depiction of Behala. The repetition and alliteration in “Crawl and Crawl, sort and sort” emphasizes the monotonous lives of the workers. In contrast, the high status and power of Behala’s authorities is evident with “In this city he [Senator Zapanta] is a very big man,” describing the power and authority of Behala’s vice president. The diction and repetition in “To be kept here and beaten and beaten… or thrown away” represents Raphael as an object to be manipulated by the police force, and ultimately dehumanizes the character. Similarly, the anaphora in “That’s all you [Raphael] are, that’s what all of you are. You are a piece of garbage” degrades the dumpsite workers of Behala, and metaphorically represents them as pointless to their society. By expressing the social inequalities of Behala, Mulligan’s Trash reflects our society’s inequalities, and prompts readers to reconsider the conventional thoughts, in an effort to promote change in our society.

Throughout Wall-E, Stanton explores the corruption of the fictional society and their leaders. The recurring shot of the Buy ‘n Large Ultrastore displays the greed of consumerism caused by capitalization. The corporation has taken over all aspects of life, including children’s education, evident in the acronym “A is for axiom, your home sweet home. B is for Buy ‘n Large, your very best friend,”  which is used to brainwash children at a young age, conveying the corruption of the powerful company to the audience. Furthermore, the close up panning shot of the previous Axiom’s captains displays a series of electronic photos, depicting the steadily increasing obesity of each generation in space, as well as the increasing power of Auto, who appears closer in each picture. By portraying the corruption of the fictional society, Stanton reflects an important social concern in our modern society, being the corruption of major political figures.

The texts Trash and Wall-E both provide readers with an extensive insight into environmental and social issues relevant in our society, with the goal of promoting change in our world. Through this, they encourage responders to critically consider the social and environmental impacts of our modern lifestyle. In Trash, Mulligan explores the inequality of the rich and poor, and describes the absence of sustainability in our society. Similarly, Stanton portrays the uncontrolled pollution of our world, as well as the power and corruption of our leaders. Through this, both authors convey the mass pollution and lack of sustainability in our present world, and by doing so illustrate the important social and environmental concerns relating to our modern society.

Gary Crew shapes the meaning of the text I Saw Nothing through his elaborate use of visual techniques, and by doing so reveals the unjust treatment of the thylacine throughout Australian History. The abusive situation experienced by the thylacine is highlighted by the animal’s slouched posture, which evokes a sense of sadness and anger to the reader. Furthermore, the downwards gaze of the thylacine not only evokes to the reader the distraught state of the animal, but also highlights the mistreatment of the thylacine by directing the viewer’s attention to the creature’s face. Similarly, the shades of red and orange used evokes sadness and anger to the viewer, and ultimately symbolises the unjustness of the thylacine’s situation. Therefore, through his elaborate use of visual techniques, Gary Crew expresses the mistreatment of the thylacine throughout Australian history in the text I Saw Nothing.

Through his intricate use of literary techniques, Gary Crew shapes the meaning of the text I Saw Nothing, and by doing so expresses the unjust treatment of the thylacine species. The strong visual imagery in “The tiger-wolf had blood all over it” reveals the unjust treatment experienced by the thylacine, and encourages the reader to sympathise for the endangered species. Furthermore, the visual and aural imagery in “Every so often it would put its head back and give a sort of a bark” depicts the abuse experienced by the animal, and evokes a sense of sorrow to the reader. Similarly, the juxtaposition of the “wild and wonderful” bush against the “moaning” thylacine further reveals the unjust treatment of the species, and evokes to the reader the distraught state of the animal. Therefore, through his use of literary techniques, Gary Crew shapes the meaning of the text I Saw Nothing, and by doing so expresses the mistreatment of the thylacine throughout Australian history.

Throughout the text There Will Come Soft Rain, Bradbury emphasises the inhumane nature of automated machinery, and by doing so depicts the science fiction trope of how our thoughtless development of inessential technology will inevitably lead to the obliteration of nature and mankind. This is evident through the recurring motif of the destruction of nature, which has been replaced by mechanical machines, evident in the anthropomorphised metaphor “the rooms were a crawl with small cleaning animals, all rubber and metal”, which depicts how metalic animals have taken over the mundane jobs which were once carried out by humanity. Furthermore, the inhumane nature of the mechanical technology is depicted through the remorseless mechanical mice, evident in the anaphora of “angry” in “angry at having to pick up mud, angry at inconvenience”, which sharply contrasts against the helpless nature of the “shivering” dog which is “covered with sores”. Similarly, the disregard technology has for mankind is depicted through the intertextual reference to Sara Teasdale’s “There Will Come Soft Rain”, which describes how “not one would mind [...] If mankind perished utterly”, and is juxtaposed against the thriving mechanical technology depicted in the text. Therefore, Bradbury highlights the science fiction trope of how technology will cause the destruction of mankind through the text There Will Come Soft Rain.

Her cold blood was smeared behind the vintage curtain, which swayed violently, drunk under the influence of the wind. The victim fell; her soulless body thumping against the ground with a powerful thud. The culprit stood, his blank face staring at the girl’s distorted position, and yet he showed no emotional response, not one sign of regret. Soon, the attack would be in the media, floating in the virtual net. Soon, the girl’s family would be in distress, suffering immense pain, more so than the victim. But the culprit stood still, his soul emptied of emotion, devoid of feeling. Joseph stumbled across the room, knowing exactly of the terror he’s caused. To ​him​, this was just another victim, just another part of his cruel plan. He laughed aloud, delighted by his new accomplishment, and once again exited from the virtual world.

In the pitch-black of night, Joseph trudged through the cobbled alleyway, illuminated by the artificial glow of mechanical streetlamps. A blanket of darkness shadowed the ruins of a once thriving city, which by now was covered by an expanse of endless debris. Mindless mechanical creatures roamed the now desolate land, surveying the area for possible intruders. Thunderous noises echoed through the ruined city, occasionally shaking the land on which Joseph stood. Despite this, Joseph continued through the rubbled backstreet, past several shattered windows and deserted homes, before halting at a crumbled stone stairway leading to a deformed building. Feeling the pale white cobwebs hanging from under the cracked marble handrail, Joseph stumbled past the doorsteps. The tarnished door burst open as Joseph rammed through the house’s entrance and drifted past the vacant corridor. A film of dust covered the splintered wooden planks underneath Joseph’s bare feet, as well as the frayed paintings dangling from the walls. Stumbling forwards, Joseph scampered past several fragmented doorways, until he entered one of the building’s bedrooms. Laying on the floor were two stuffed bears, each with mountains of cotton pouring out of torn extremities. But Joseph’s eyes immediately converged onto a pristine, velvet-lined coffin radiating blue light, illuminating the room. Just like every other time, Joseph walked towards the coffin and opened it up. Inside, beside a tag labelled “virtual coffin 2085” laid a seemingly frozen man, tangled in a jungle of wires. “This would be the last person,” Joseph thought to himself, “the last man to erase from the face of the earth”. And Joseph, a cyborg acquired from the robot race with a brain like a computer - his actions calculated and devoid of emotion - would be the hero to do so.

Mervyn James’ poem “Pieces of the World” depicts the progression of the Australian culture from an exclusive colonisation to a multicultural, grand society, and therefore is a positive portrayal of our country. The multicultural state of Australia is expressed through the metaphor “blood of other lands created the Australian caste”, which personifies our society as being inclusive and welcoming to other cultures. Furthermore, the metaphor “A great mosiac” is symbolistic of the fragments of Australia uniting, and further highlights our multicultural and inclusive state. The enjambment in “Triumphant in endeavour \ and ideal” highlights our thriving and prosperous society, and describes our country as flawless and ideal. Similarly, the positive image of Australia is reinforced through “Grand now, in universal eyes”, which depicts the Australian society as universally grand and admirable. Therefore, through the poem “Pieces of the World” Mervyn James highlights Australia’s multicultural and inclusive state, and by doing so positively portrays our society as being grand and ideal.